# Machine Learning – March 23, 2018

Time limit: 1.5 hours.

| Last Name                                                        | First Name | Matricola |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|-----------|
|                                                                  |            |           |
|                                                                  |            |           |
| For AIML students, choose at least 3 questions from the 6 below. |            |           |

#### EXERCISE A1

- 1. Provide a formal definition of overfitting.
- 2. Discuss the problem of overfitting in learning with Decision Trees and illustrate possible solutions to it.

## EXERCISE A2

- 1. Describe the Naive Bayes Classifier and highlight the approximation made with respect to the Bayes Optimal Classifier.
- 2. Provide design and implementation choices for solving the following problem through Naive Bayes Classifier :

Classification of scientific papers in categories according to their main subject. The categories to be considered are: ML (Machine Learning), KR (Knowledge Representation), PL (Planning). Data available for each scientific paper are: title, authors, abstract and publication site (name of the journal and/or of the conference).

# EXERCISE A3

- 1. Define with a precise formal definition the unsupervised learning problem.
- 2. Provide a full example of unsupervised learning problem (i.e., a specific invented data set), possibly in a graphical form.
- 3. Describe a solution to the defined problem based on K-Means, providing examples of execution of some steps of the algorithm and a reasonable solution.

### EXERCISE B1

- 1. Provide the main steps of classification based on K-nearest neighbors (K-NN).
- 2. Draw an example in 2D demonstrating the application of the 3-NN algorithm for the classification of 3 points given a dataset consisting of points from 4 different classes.

Notes: You can choose how the points of the 4 classes are distributed. Use a different symbol for each class (e.g. use (\*,x,+,-) for the classes and (o) for the points to be classified).

# EXERCISE B2

- 1. Describe the role of the following notions related to parameter estimation of an artificial neural network:
  - backpropagation
  - forward and backward pass
  - Stochastic Gradient Descent
- 2. Provide the main steps of the backpropagation algorithm.

#### EXERCISE B3

- 1. Briefly describe the goal of linear regression and define the corresponding model.
- 2. Given a dataset D = {(x T 1 , t1) T , . . . ,(x T <sup>N</sup> , t<sup>N</sup> ) <sup>T</sup> } with x<sup>n</sup> the input values and t<sup>n</sup> the corresponding target values, explain how the parameters of the model can be estimated either in a batch or in a sequential mode.